# flooding-stress
A mechanistic model for simulating plant responses to flooding stress. The model describes oxygen and carbon dynamics of plants subjected to flooding stress, and their dependence on plant rooting depth, aerenchyma levels and ROL barrier induction.

A minimal mechanistic model for plant stress and acclimation responses under waterlogging

Overview
This project was designed to mechanistically model plant responses to waterlogging, with a particular focus on plant fitness under different acclimation strategies, such as aerenchyma formation and radial oxygen loss (ROL) barrier induction, in plants with varying rooting depths. The code was written in MATLAB, containing 18 files, including seven function files, five main MATLAB files corresponding to different settings of the model that can be run to generate the figures of the main text, and six MATLAB files that can be directly run for sensitivity analysis.

Key features:
The file main.m simulates the temporal dynamics of plant response variables, including root oxygen levels, carbohydrate reserves, stomatal aperture, ROL barrier induction, and others, under specific scenarios of rooting depths, aerenchyma content levels, and the presence or absence of ROL barriers. The dynamics are simulated for a single specific parameter setting, which can be specified by the user.
The four main MATLAB files described next are used to simulate plant dynamics for a two dimensional matrix of parameter conditions, varying two model parameters over a range of values while keeping other model parameters constant. Survival_aeR_root.m simulates plant survival across a range of rooting depths (0.2 m to 0.9 m) and aerenchyma content levels (0 to 0.7), and was run under both the presence and absence of a ROL barrier. When present, the maximum ROL barrier content was set at 0.9. Survival_induction_root.m simulates plant survival across the previously mentioned rooting depth range (0.2 m to 0.9 m) and a range of maximum ROL barrier induction levels (0 to 0.9). Similarly, Survival_induction_aerenchyma.m simulates plant survival across the specified range of aerenchyma content levels (0 to 0.7) and maximum ROL barrier induction levels (0 to 0.9). Finally Survival_InductionTiming.m simulates plant survival across the specified rooting depth (0.2 m to 0.9 m) and aerenchyma content level (0 to 0.7) ranges, and was applied under 3 different settings to compare the effects of early, intermediate, and late timings of ROL barrier induction.
The code also contains 7 function files. ATP.m simulates the dynamics of root ATP concentration. OxygenDiffusion.m simulates the oxygen diffusion rates between air and shoot, and between soil and root. OxygenMetabolism.m simulates the oxygen consumption rate in shoot and root through aerobic respiration. reserves.m simulates the dynamics of plant-level carbohydrate reserves, which are generated through photosynthesis and consumed through aerobic and anaerobic metabolisms. ROL_barrier.m simulates the dynamic induction of ROL barriers. StomataPhotosynthesis.m simulates the stomatal aperture and photosynthetic rate. SoilOxygen.m simulates the dynamics of soil oxygen, which were divided into rhizosphere oxygen and bulk soil oxygen. As soil oxygen dynamics is not the primary focus of this study, it was treated as a boundary condition for plant behavior. 
The 6 sensitivity analysis files examine how sensitive the model is to some of the key parameters.  Sen_canopy_root.m and Sen_canopy_aeT.m perform sensitivity analysis on canopy area, where five canopy area values centered around the reference value used in the main text were selected. Sen_canopy_root.m examines the plant survival time across the specified range of rooting depths, and Sen_canopy_aeT.m examines the plant survival time across the specified range of aerenchyma content levels. Sen_Kp_root.m and Sen_Kp_aeT.m perform the sensitivity analysis on the value of K_p, which refers to the sensitivity of stomatal activities to the change of root ATP level. Again five K_p values centered around the reference value in the main text were selected, and the two files examine the plant survival time across the specified range of rooting depths and aerenchyma content levels respectively. Sen_Dplant_root.m and Sen_Dplant_aeT.m perform the sensitivity analysis on the baseline shoot-root oxygen diffusivity in absence of aerenchyma. Still, five diffusivity values centered around the reference value in the main text were selected. Sen_Dplant_root.m examines the plant survival time across the specified range of rooting depths, and Sen_Dplant_aeT.m examines the plant survival time across the specified range of aerenchyma content levels.


Prerequisites
Before running this code, please make sure you have MATLAB with version R2018a or higher.

Usage
All figures in the manuscript can be generated through the five main files and the six sensitivity analysis files, which can be run directly on MATLAB. The files main.m, Survival_aeR_root.m, Survival_induction_root.m, Survival_induction_aerenchyma.m, and Survival_InductionTiming.m can be run directly on MATLAB. main.m generated Figure 2a-2c, 3a-3c, 4a-4c, S2, S3, and S4. Survival_aeR_root.m generated Figure 2d, 3d, 4d, 5a and 5b. Survival_induction_root.m generated Figure 5c and Survival_induction_aerenchyma.m generated Figure 5d. Survival_InductionTiming.m generated Figure S5 and S6. Sen_canopy_root.m, Sen_canopy_aeT.m, Sen_Kp_root.m, Sen_Kp_aeT.m, Sen_Dplant_root.m, and Sen_Dplant_aeT.m generated Figure S7a, S7b, S8a, S8b, S9a, and S9b, respectively.


